There were, actually,
two versions of TDMA in development.
The North American version called IS54,
IS136 and the European version called GSM.
For the North American version,
the 2G had to be
backward compatible with the 1G systems.
Which they did a very nice job but
the recorder that they used was
less than satisfactory with
respect to voice calls.
Especially when there was background
noise like driving in a car.
In the early 90s, phones were very,
very expensive and
in-car usage was a very
important use case.
So at the receiver,
when it got LPC parameters
corresponding to the road noise,
it would happily convert
the pitch into speech like sounds.
And that's not the American
version was sounding like
gurgling sounds or
people talking from inside a well.
So just because of the voice quality,
the CDMA came to a premature death and
the operators soon shut down
the networks and all the services.
Multiple millions of dollars
were lost in that exercise.
Anyway, that left
the European version GSM and
CDMA for the 2G systems and,
just like in the early days of telephony,
there were
very bitter battles about the direction
the evolutions need to take place.
At that time, I was working for
a boutique voice recognition company,
called Voice Processing Corporation.
In Cambridge, Massachusetts, we were
providing technologies to the computer
telephony industry condition technologies.
I'd like to talk to you about
a specific date that I remember.
On September 6th, 1996 our CEO,
David Levi Called me to his office,
and he showed me this
Wall Street Journal front page article.
It was a pretty nasty ding on CDMA.
And, David wanted us to pick
a winning technology to support
our voice recognition services.
And he was particularly worried about
how the Variable Bit Rate codec,
VBR, would affect voice
recognition performance.
So when I read the article, I knew that I
was going to work for Qualcomm, sometime.
And I did tell them that
we are such a small fry,
doesn't make sense to pick GSM or CDMA,
we will make our technology
work equally well for
both CBR Cortex and
VBR Cortex which we did and
I assure some of the staff
too People at Qualcomm,
that the VBR codec did extremely well for
voice recognition services.
They asked me to come in and
put voice recognition on the handsets.
So exactly an year later,
I was working at Qualcomm.
Anyway, Europe and US made truce about
what technology was going to be used for
3G services going forward.
There were two groups developing
the protocols, 3GPP and 3GPP2.
One was mainly 3GPP2 is mainly for
America, China, Japan, Korea.
And the 3GPP, Europe, Australia,
there were many countries in
which both systems coexisted.
You can think of the differences
as 220 volts versus 110 volts
are driving on the right side of the road,
in some countries,
and on the other side of
the road in other countries.
And over the years, there were many,
many improvements to the air interface and
the recorders to further improve
the voice quality and the capacity.
I will briefly mention the next one,
the 4G LTE.
LTE stands for long term evolution.
This is where the protocols were
completely harmonized between
both the camps so that you could leverage
the economies of scale much further.
So the way DFMA works is
you can think of this very,
very loosely as a combination of FDMA and
TDMA, simultaneously.
Throughout the call or
throughout a session,
the users are allocated which
carrier they will be using.
Or which set of carriers
they will be using.
And which time slots they will be using.
Dynamically based on the user's need and
the system wide load and
since we are operating on much
larger spectrums compared
to the 3G versions we have
much larger throughput that you
could provide to a single user and
you also had much better
statistical multiplexing gates.